# fast_sqrt
Fast Square Root Calculation for 16 Bit Fix-Point values from 0 to 1 (1.15) 


## Problem Description
 * Calculate square root for a value between 0 and 1 (1+15 bit fix point), return 0 for negative values
 * Intended for embedded systems without FPU
 * Pure integer calculation
 * 16 bit signed integer as input and output data type
 * Integer format is 1.15 fix point for input and output
 * No code dependencies for simple integration 

## Example Values for 1.15 Fix Point

  | 1.15 value hex | 1.15 value dec | Interpretation |
  |---|---|---|
  | 0x8000 | 32768 | -1 |
  | 0x8001 | 32769 | -0.999969483 |
  | 0x8401 | 33793 | -0.968719483 |
  | 0xffff | 65535 | -0.000030518 |
  | 0x0000 | 0 | 0 |
  | 0x0001 | 1 |  0.000030517 |
  | 0x2803 | 10243 | 0.312591552 |
  | 0x7fff | 32767 | 0.999969482 |

## Usage

Download file https://github.com/olikraus/fast_sqrt/blob/main/fast_sqrt.c and add this code to your project.

Add the prototype `intt16_t fast_sqrt(int16_t number)` to your project and call "fast_sqrt" to calculate the square root of a 1.15 16 bit value.

## Implementation Details

 * Instead of calculation of `sqrt(n)` directly, the code will do an iterative approximation of the value `1/sqrt(n)`. `sqrt(n)` is calculated by `n/sqrt(n)` (see end of the code). The approximation `x=1/sqrt(n)` is done by repeated calculation of `x := x + x*(1-n*x*x)/2`. 
 * The calculation of `1/sqrt(n)` is done in 2.14 fix point format. More detailed:

  | Variable | Fix Point Format | Description |
  |---|---|---|
  | number | 1.15 | Input value (but modified in the code if required). |
  | temp | 2.14 | Temporary value during the `1/sqrt(n)` calculation. |
  | x | 2.14 | Aproximation for `1/sqrt(n)`. The last operation in `fast_sqrt` procedure will change the value of `x` to 1.15 format. |

 * Two different fix point formats are used. The format itself is defined by the comma position:

  | Macro | Value | Fix Point Format | Description |
  |---|---|---|---|
  | INPUT_COMMA | 15 | 1.15 | Used for input and result data |
  | INTERNAL_COMMA | 14 | 2.14 | Used for the `1/sqrt(n)` calculation |

 * A lookup table is used to minimize the iterations for the `1/sqrt(n)` approximation by using a good starting value. The lookup table `sqrt_start_values` contains precalculated values for `1/sqrt(n)`. The table is generated by https://github.com/olikraus/fast_sqrt/blob/main/calculate_start_values.c . The values in this table are in 2.14 format.
 * In the code, the expression `x := x + x*(1-n*x*x)/2` is changed to `x := x * ( 1 + 0.5 - d*x*x/2 )`. This avoids one add operations.
 * For better precision very small input values are up shifted. At the and of the code the result is corrected by down shifting. This is based on the following mathematical equivalence: `sqrt(n) == sqrt(4*n/4) == sqrt(4*n)/2`.
 * The result still may include an error of up to 2 bit (deviation of +/-3 or +/-0.000091552).
 * The implementation returns 0x7fff for the input value 0x7fff.

## fast_sqrt vs arm_sqrt_q15

 * `fast_sqrt` can be used as replacement for `arm_sqrt_q15`.
 * `fast_sqrt` does not include any other dependencies, the `q15_t` datatype is replaced by `int16_t` from `stdint.h`.
 * As of writing this README, `fast_sqrt` has a higher precission compared to `arm_sqrt_q15`: From my testing arm_sqrt_q15 might be wrong by up to three bits (+/-6). I think this could be caused by the 4.12 format which is internaly used in `arm_sqrt_q15`.

## References

 * Mathematical Background for the square root calculation: https://www.jjj.de/fxt/#fxtbook
 * Q15 SQRT procedure from ARM CMSIS DSP library: https://github.com/ARM-software/CMSIS_5/blob/develop/CMSIS/DSP/Source/FastMathFunctions/arm_sqrt_q15.c 
